Rewritten autoinstallation chapter of client configuration guide (#917)
uyuni-project/uyuni-docs: modules/client-configuration/pages/autoinst-profiles.adoc

[[autoinst-profiles]]
= Autoinstallation Profiles

> An autoinstallation profile determines how the operating system will be installed. You may for example specify additional kernel parameters to be passed to the installer.

Author: ok

> The most important part of the profile is the "autoinstallation file". When you perform an installation manually, you must provide information to the installer, such as partitioning and networking information and user details. The "autoinstallation file" is a method of providing this information in a scripted form. Such file is sometimes referred to as an "answers file".

Author: I'll keep the quotes for first occurrences of a term we introduce.

Within {productname}, you can use two different types of profiles, depending on the operating system of the clients you want to install:

* For {sle} clients, use {ay}.
* For {rhel} clients, use {kickstart}.

You can use both {ay} and {kickstart} profiles if you want to install clients with different operating systems.

> See xref:client-configuration:autoinstallation-profiles.adoc#autoyast[Next section] for generic instructions on how to declare a profile.

Author: ok

> See xref:client-configuration:autoinstallation-profiles.adoc#autoyast[AutoYast Profiles] for pecularities of the {ay} profiles.

Author: ok

> See xref:client-configuration:autoinstallation-profiles.adoc#kickstart[Kickstart Profiles] for pecularities of the {kickstart} profiles.

Author: ok

> The autoinstallation file contained in the profile may use variables and code snippets. For details, see xref:client-configuration:autoinstallation-profiles.adoc#templates-syntax[Templates Syntax].

Author: hmm,ok, but for consistency with the rest i will keep it so

[[declare-profile]]
== Declare the Profile

> When you have prepared an autoinstallation file and distribution, you can create profiles to manage autoinstallation on your {productname} Server. For a given distribution, the profile will determine how to install this distribution.

Author: not "any"... if you move from sles 12 sp5 to sles 15 sp3, you will need to use a different profile.

> You can create your autoinstallation profile directly in the {productname} {webui}. To see and manage your autoinstallation profiles, navigate to menu:Systems[Autoinstallation > Profiles].

Author: The first sentence was copy-paste from previous doc. As it does not bring much, I will simply nuke it.

The second sentence is duplicate with a sentence below, so > /dev/null as well.

> One way to create a profile is to upload an {ay} or {kickstart} file. Alternatively, for {kickstart} only, you can use the {webui} wizard.

Author: ok

.Procedure: Creating an Autoinstallation Profile by Upload
. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Systems[Autoinstallation > Profiles].
. Click btn:[Upload Kickstart/Autoyast File].

> . In the [guimenu]``Label`` field, type a name for the profile. Do not use spaces.

Author: ok

. In the [guimenu]``Autoinstall Tree`` field, select the autoinstallation distribution to use for this profile.
. In the [guimenu]``Virtualization Type`` field, select the type of virtualization to use for this profile, or select ``None`` for no virtualization.
. Copy the contents of your autoinstallation file into the [guimenu]``File Contents`` field, or upload the file directly using the [guimenu]``File to Upload`` field. Refer

> to section xref:client-configuration:autoinstallation-profiles.adoc#autoyast[AutoYast Profiles] or xref:client-configuration:autoinstallation-profiles.adoc#kickstart[Kickstart Profiles] for information about what to put here.

Author: ok

. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Systems[Autoinstallation > Profiles].
. Click btn:[Upload Kickstart/Autoyast File].
. In the [guimenu]``Label`` field, type a name for the profile.
    Do not use spaces.
. In the [guimenu]``Label`` field, type a name for the profile. Do not use spaces.
. In the [guimenu]``Autoinstall Tree`` field, select the autoinstallation distribution to use for this profile.
. In the [guimenu]``Virtualization Type`` field, select the type of virtualization to use for this profile, or select ``None`` for no virtualization.
. Copy the contents of your autoinstallation file into the [guimenu]``File Contents`` field, or upload the file directly using the [guimenu]``File to Upload`` field.
. Copy the contents of your autoinstallation file into the [guimenu]``File Contents`` field, or upload the file directly using the [guimenu]``File to Upload`` field. Refer
to section xref:client-configuration:autoinstallation-profiles.adoc#autoyast[AutoYast Profiles] or xref:client-configuration:autoinstallation-profiles.adoc#kickstart[Kickstart Profiles] for information about what to put here.
. Click btn:[Create] to create the profile.

> 

Reviewer: Three blank lines before headings is standard, but we can fix this later on.

Author: I'm not sure I understand this one

Author: will fix it

Reviewer: All of them: https://github.com/uyuni-project/uyuni-docs/wiki/markup-syntax#whitespace

Verify new or changed settings before saving them, by navigating to the [guimenu]``Partitioning`` tab.
====

> The kernel options from the distribution and the profile are combined.

Reviewer: This feels like it's sitting out here on its own, does it need to be attached to a para somewhere?

Author: I think the notes should be made part of normal text.

> You can change the details and settings of your autoinstallation profiles by navigating to menu:Systems[Autoinstallation > Profiles] and clicking the name of the profile you want to edit. Alternatively, you may navigate to menu:Systems[System List], select the client you want to provision, and navigate to the menu:Provisioning[Autoinstallation] subtab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can change the details and settings of your autoinstallation profiles by navigating to menu:Systems[Autoinstallation > Profiles] and clicking the name of the profile you want to edit. 
Alternatively, navigate to menu:Systems[System List], select the client you want to provision, and go to the menu:Provisioning[Autoinstallation] subtab.
```

Author: ok

[[autoyast]]
== AutoYast Profiles

> An {ay} profile consists in a [guimenu]``Label`` that identifies the profile, an [guimenu]``Autoinstall Tree`` that points to an autoinstallation distribution, various options, and, most importantly, an {ay} installation file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An {ay} profile consists of a [guimenu]``Label`` that identifies the profile, an [guimenu]``Autoinstall Tree`` that points to an autoinstallation distribution, various options, and, most importantly, an {ay} installation file.
```

Author: ok

> 
> This "control" file is an XML file that give directions to the {ay} installer. You will find the full syntax of {ay} installation files at https://doc.opensuse.org/projects/autoyast/#cha-configuration-installation-options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file is stored as an XML file that gives directions to the {ay} installer. 
For more information about the syntax used in {ay} installation files, see https://doc.opensuse.org/projects/autoyast/#cha-configuration-installation-options.
```

Author: "control file" was intentionally mentioned because it's how it is called in the AutoYast documentation.

> {suse} provides templates of {ay} installation files in the public GitHub repository at https://github.com/SUSE/manager-build-profiles. You may take your inspiration from them.
> 
> Each of these profiles requires you to set some variables before you use it. Check the [path]``README`` file included with the script to determine which variables you need. For more information about using variables in {ay} scripts, see xref:client-configuration:autoinst-profiles#variables[Variables].
> 
> For more information about AutoYast, see https://doc.opensuse.org/projects/autoyast/.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{suse} provides templates of {ay} installation files that you can use as a starting point for your own custom files.
Each of these profiles requires you to set some variables before you use it. 
Check the [path]``README`` file included with the script to determine which variables you need. 

* For the templates, see https://github.com/SUSE/manager-build-profiles.
* For more information about using variables in {ay} scripts, see xref:client-configuration:autoinst-profiles#variables[Variables].
* For more information about {ay}, see https://doc.opensuse.org/projects/autoyast/.
```

Author: ok

[[kickstart]]
== KickStart Profiles

> {kickstart} profiles can be created via a wizard, and offer a larger number of configuration options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{kickstart} profiles offer a large number of configuration options.
You can create them by hand, or use the wizard in the {productname} {webui}.
```

Author: much better

> One of the possibilities offered by the {kickstart} profiles is the file preservation lists. If you have many custom configuration files located on a client you want to {kickstart}, you can save them as a list, and associate that list with the {kickstart} profile to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{kickstart} profiles allow you to use file preservation lists. 
If you have many custom configuration files located on a client you want to {kickstart}, you can save them as a list, and associate that list with the appropriate {kickstart} profile.
```

Author: ok

> .Procedure: Create a File Preservation List

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Procedure: Creating a File Preservation List
```

Author: ok

. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Systems[Autoinstallation > File Preservation] and click btn:[Create File Preservation List].
. Enter a suitable label, and list absolute paths to all files and directories you want to save.
. Click btn:[Create List].

> . Include the file preservation list in your {kickstart} profile by navigating to menu:Systems[Autoinstallation > Profiles] and selecting the profile you want to edit. Navigate to the menu:System Details[File Preservation] subtab and select the file preservation list to include.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Include the file preservation list in your {kickstart} profile.
  Navigate to menu:Systems[Autoinstallation > Profiles], select the profile you want to edit, go to the menu:System Details[File Preservation] subtab, and select the file preservation list to include.
```

Author: ok

[NOTE]
====
File preservation lists are limited to a total size of 1{nbsp}MB.
Special devices like [path]``/dev/hda1`` and [path]``/dev/sda1`` cannot be preserved.
Only use file and directory names, you cannot use regular expression wildcards.
====

For more information about Kickstart, see the Red Hat documentation.

[[templates-syntax]]
== Templates Syntax

Parts of your installation file will be replaced during the installation:

> * variables will be replaced with single values;
> * code snippets will be replaced with whole sections of text;
> * escaped symbols or sections will not be replaced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Variables are replaced with single values.
* Code snippets are replaced with whole sections of text.
* Escaped symbols or sections are not replaced.
```

Not sure about including that third point, which probably means this should be prose instead.

Author: escaping  is a section of its own

but yeah it should not be part of that list

You can create autoinstallation variables and code snippets within the {productname} {webui}.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: not sure these remarks about the web ui really bring something

This mechanism allows you to reinstall large numbers of systems, without having to manually create profiles for each of them.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: this needs some reordering

> It's a template engine called Cheetah that allows Cobbler to do these replacements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{kickstart} uses a template engine called Cheetah that allows Cobbler to do these replacements.
```

Author: wrong technically.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: is being reorganized

Within a profile, the [guimenu]``Autoinstallation File`` tab allows you to see the result of the substitutions.

> For instructions and details about:
> * variables, see xref:client-configuration:autoinst-profiles#variables[Variables];
> * code snippets, see xref:client-configuration:autoinst-profiles#code-snippets[Code Snippets];
> * escaping, see xref:client-configuration:autoinst-profiles#variables[Escaping].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For more information about variables, see xref:client-configuration:autoinst-profiles#variables[].
* For more information about code snippets, see xref:client-configuration:autoinst-profiles#code-snippets[].
* For more information about escaping characters, see xref:client-configuration:autoinst-profiles#variables[].
```

Author: yup

[[variables]]
=== Variables

> Autoinstallation variables can be used to substitute values into {kickstart} and {ay} profiles.
> 
> To define a variable, from the profile, navigate to the [guimenu]``Variables`` subtab, and create a name-value pair ([replaceable]``name=value``) in the text box.
> 
> For example, if you want to autoinstall a system that joins the network of a specified organization (for example the Engineering department), you can create a profile variable to set the IP address and the gateway server address to a variable that any system using that profile uses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Autoinstallation variables can be used to substitute values into {kickstart} and {ay} profiles.
To define a variable, open the profile and navigate to the [guimenu]``Variables`` subtab to create a [replaceable]``name=value`` pair in the text box.
For example, if you want to autoinstall a system that joins a specific network, create a profile variable to set the IP address and the gateway server address to a variable that any system using that profile uses.
```

Not sure about "using that profile uses" :confused:

Author: copy-paste from existing text

i think they meant "shared by all machines that use same profile"

it needs to be rewritten for simplification

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: reorganized

Author: not 100% sure because of the many renumbering of the lines, but trying

Add these lines to the [guimenu]``Variables`` text box:
----
IPADDR=192.168.0.28

> GATEWAY=192.168.0.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GATEWAY=192.168.0.1
----
```

Author: good catch

> To use the variable, use the name of the variable in the profile to substitute the value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the variable, type the name of the variable in the profile to substitute the value.
```

Author: this is not even correct

For example, the [option]``network`` part of a {kickstart} file looks like the following:

----
network --bootproto=static --device=eth0 --onboot=on --ip=$IPADDR \
  --gateway=$GATEWAY
----

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: reorganized

The [option]``$IPADDR`` is resolved to ``192.168.0.28``, and the [option]``$GATEWAY`` to ``192.168.0.1``.

In installation files, variables use a hierarchy.
System variables take precedence over profile variables, which in turn take precedence over distribution variables.

[[code-snippets]]
=== Code Snippets

> {productname} also comes with a large number of predefined code snippets. Navigate to menu:Systems[Autoinstallation > Autoinstallation Snippets] to see the list of existing snippets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{productname} also comes with a large number of predefined code snippets. 
Navigate to menu:Systems[Autoinstallation > Autoinstallation Snippets] to see the list of existing snippets.
```

> 
> Use a snippet by inserting the [option]``$SNIPPET()`` macro in your autoinstallation file.
> 
> For example, in {kickstart}:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a snippet by inserting the [option]``$SNIPPET()`` macro in your autoinstallation file.
For example, in {kickstart}:
```

Author: ok

----
$SNIPPET('spacewalk/rhel_register_script')
----

Or, in {ay}:
----
<init-scripts config:type="list">
  $SNIPPET('spacewalk/sles_register_script')
</init-scripts>
----

The macro is parsed by Cobbler and substituted with the contents of the snippet.

> You can also store your own code snippets to use in autoinstallation files later on.
> 
> Click btn:[Create Snippet] to create a new code snippet.
> 
> This example sets up a {kickstart} snippet for a common hard drive partition configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also store your own code snippets to use in autoinstallation files later on.
Click btn:[Create Snippet] to create a new code snippet.
This example sets up a {kickstart} snippet for a common hard drive partition configuration:
```

Author: ok

----
clearpart --all
part /boot --fstype ext3 --size=150 --asprimary
part / --fstype ext3 --size=40000 --asprimary
part swap --recommended

part pv.00 --size=1 --grow

volgroup vg00 pv.00
logvol /var --name=var vgname=vg00 --fstype ext3 --size=5000
----

Use the snippet with, for example:
----
$SNIPPET('my_partition')
----

[[escaping]]
=== Escaping

> If the autoinstallation file contains shell script variables like ``$(example)``, the content needs to be escaped with a backslash: ``\$(example)``. Escaping the ``$`` symbol prevents the templating engine from evaluating the symbol as an internal variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the autoinstallation file contains shell script variables like ``$(example)``, the content needs to be escaped with a backslash: ``\$(example)``. 
Escaping the ``$`` symbol prevents the templating engine from evaluating the symbol as an internal variable.
```

Author: ok

> Long scripts or strings can be escaped by wrapping them with the ``\#raw`` and ``\#end`` directives. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Long scripts or strings can be escaped by wrapping them with the ``\#raw`` and ``\#end`` directives. 
For example:
```

Author: ok

----
#raw
#!/bin/bash
for i in {0..2}; do
 echo "$i - Hello World!"
done
#end raw
----

> Any line with a ``#`` symbol followed by a whitespace is treated as a comment and is therefore not evaluated. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any line with a ``#`` symbol followed by a whitespace is treated as a comment and is therefore not evaluated. 
For example:
```

Author: ok
